'\" t
.TH XCOLOR 1 2018

.SH NAME
xcolor \- lightweight color picker for X11

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B xcolor
[\fB\-f\fR \fINAME\fR | \fB\-c\fR \fIFORMAT\fR] [\fB\-s\fR [\fISELECTION\fR]] [\fB\-n\fR] [\fB\-v\fR] [\fB\-h\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBxcolor\fR is a lightweight color picker for X11. Use mouse cursor to select
colors visible anywhere on the screen to get their RGB representation.

.PP
By default, the selected color is printed to the standard output.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI \-f " NAME\fR,\fP " \-\-format " NAME"
Specify output format. Possible values for \fINAME\fR are \fBhex\fR, \fBHEX\fR,
\fBhex!\fR, \fBHEX!\fR, \fBrgb\fR, and \fBplain\fR. See \fBFORMATTING\fR for an
explanation of different formatting options. Conflicts with \fB\-\-custom\fR.

.TP
.BI \-c " FORMAT\fR,\fP " \-\-custom " FORMAT"
Specify template for custom output format. See \fBCUSTOM FORMATTING\fR for an
explanation of template syntax. Conflicts with \fB\-\-format\fR.

.TP
.BI \-s " \fR[\fPSELECTION\fR]\fP\fR,\fP " \-\-selection " \fR[\fPSELECTION\fR]\fP"
Save output to X11 selection. Possible values for \fISELECTION\fR are
\fBprimary\fR and \fBsecondary\fR. If \fISELECTION\fR is not supplied,
\fBprimary\fR is used.

.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-preview
Disable preview window.

.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help message and exit.

.SH FORMATTING
By default, the color values are printed in lowercase hexadecimal format. The
output format can be changed using the \fB\-\-format\fR \fINAME\fR switch. The
possible \fINAME\fR values are:

.TP
.B hex
Lowercase hexadecimal (default)
.TP
.B HEX
Uppercase hexadecimal
.TP
.B hex!
Compact lowercase hexadecimal
.TP
.B HEX!
Compact uppercase hexadecimal
.TP
.B rgb
Decimal RGB
.TP
.B plain
Decimal with semicolon separators

.PP
The compact form refers to CSS three-letter color codes as specified by CSS
Color Module Level 3. If the color is not expressible in three-letter form, the
regular six-letter form will be used.

.SS CUSTOM FORMATTING

The \fB\-\-format\fR switch provides quick access to some commonly used
formatting options. However, if custom output formatting is desired, this can be
achieved using the \fB\-\-custom\fR \fIFORMAT\fR switch. The \fIFORMAT\fR
parameter specifies a template for the output and supports a simple template
language.

\fIFORMAT\fR templates can contain special expansions that are written inside
\fB%\fR{\fI...\fR} blocks. These blocks will be expanded into color values
according to the specifiers defined inside the block. Here are examples of valid
format strings and what they might translate to:

.RS
.TS
lB lB
l l.
Format String	Example Output
%{r}, %{g}, %{b}	255, 0, 100
Green: %{-4g}	Green: ---7
#%{02hr}%{02hg}%{02hb}	#00ff00
%{016Br}	0000000000000011
.TE
.RE

Expansion blocks in format strings always contain a channel specifier (\fBr\fR
for red, \fBg\fR for green, and \fBb\fR for blue). Additionally, they can
contain an optional number format specifier (\fBh\fR for lowercase hexadecimal,
\fBH\fR for uppercase hexadecimal, \fBo\fR for octal, \fBB\fR for binary, and
\fBd\fR for decimal) and an optional padding specifier consisting of a character
to use for padding and the length the string should be padded to. The diagram
bellow illustrates how we can use these rules to decode a formatting template:

.nf
.RS
\fB%\fR{\fI0\fR\fB16\fR\fIB\fR\fBr\fR}
  | |||
  | ||`- Channel (\fIred\fR)
  | |`-- Number format specifier (\fIbinary\fR)
  | `--- Padding length (\fI16\fR)
  `----- Character to use for padding (\fI0\fR)
.RE
.fi

The output is the contents of the red color channel formatted in binary and
padded with zeroes to be sixteen characters long.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.I XCOLOR_FOREGROUND
Disable daemon mode. Because of the way selections work in X11, \fBxcolor\fR
forks into background when \fB\-\-selection\fR mode is used. This behavior can
be disabled by defining \fIXCOLOR_FOREGROUND\fR environment variable.

.TP
.I XCOLOR_DISABLE_SHAPE
Disable the use of shaped preview window. By default, \fBxcolor\fR tries to use
a round-shaped preview window for displaying the currently selected color. This
behavior can be disabled by defining \fIXCOLOR_DISABLE_SHAPE\fR environment
variable.

.SH AUTHORS
Samuel Laurén <samuel.lauren@iki.fi>
